The Immaculate Conception of the glorious ever-virgin Mary, mother of God, who by a singular privilege of God was preserved entirely free from the stain of original sin. Pope Pius IX solemnly established this feast day. – Roman Martyrology for December 8

In Roman Catholic teaching, "original sin" is the sin of Adam which humans inherit at conception but which is washed away in Baptism. "The Immaculate Conception" is the doctrine that Mary was preserved from original sin at the moment of conception, receiving in advance the grace of Baptism that her son would earn for all mankind. Writers since the 4th century have referred to Mary as "immaculate" but the doctrine was hotly disputed in the Middle Ages, with the Dominicans generally opposed and the Franciscans favoring it with astonishing fervor (example). It was officially promulgated in 1854 (Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Immaculate Conception").

In the 16th century Molanus (393-94) commended the use of references to the Song of Solomon in images relating to Mary's conception. He mentions the sun, moon, stars, and the words of Canticle 4:7, Tota pulchra est amica mea et macula non est in te ("All beautiful is my friend and there is no stain in thee"). The verse is used as an antiphon at Vespers on the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, and in reference to it some Immaculate Conception images are entitled Maria Tota Pulchra. The second one at right is an example.

Some 16th- and 17th-century images of Mary's birth and early years use symbolism to suggest the child's purity. Baskets of eggs, symbolic of purity and chastity, are included in Titian's Presentation of the Virgin Mary and Zurbarán's Birth of the Virgin. In Luca Giordano's Birth the baby is a source of light, like the Christ Child in Nativity images, Jesus being the only other person said to have been conceived without sin.

In the 17th century a specific iconography for the Immaculate Conception developed from what was taken to be a reference to Mary in Revelation 12:1 – "And a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars." As in the first picture at right, the images show Mary "clothed" with a sunburst, with twelve stars about her head. The "crown of twelve stars" even appears sometimes in images of the young Mary learning to read from her mother, St. Anne (example).

Sometimes there will be a dragon beneath Mary's feet, in reference to the red dragon of Revelation 12:4 that "stood before the woman who was ready to be delivered, that when she should be delivered, he might devour her son." In the second picture at right, the dragon is being cast down by the archangel Michael, which is what happens in Revelation 12:7-9.

Angels are usually in attendance. The moon may be a crescent, as in the third picture at right, but in the 19th and 20th centuries it is more likely to be a sphere, as in the first two pictures at right. Less commonly, Mary may be standing only on clouds, in which case there should be some other reference to Revelation 12 (example). She almost always has her hands pressed together in prayer.

In the legends Mary's parents are known as Anne and Joachim. They had been living apart, but an angel reunited them in Jerusalem and Mary was conceived. In Catholic doctrine this was an "immaculate conception," free from the taint of Original Sin. See my pages on St. Joachim and the Immaculate Conception for the full details.
THE BIRTH OF THE VIRGIN

Neither scripture nor the apocryphal literature provides any details about the Virgin Mary's actual birth. Given this silence, medieval and Renaissance images of the birth adopt the conventions of the earliest images of the nativity of Jesus: The mother is seen reclining in bed just after the birth while midwives pour water to wash the child in a basin (example), and compare a Nativity of Christ from the same century). One 13th-century panel even emphasizes the visual parallels between the two births by setting them on either side of an image of the enthroned Virgin.

But a number of features keep the two Nativities fairly easy to distinguish from one another. First, Mary is born in a real bed in a structure that is emphatically a private home rather than a stable or cave (example). In the Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew Joachim is a shepherd who gives most of his produce to the poor and the godly, with the result that "the Lord multiplied to him his herds, so that there was no man like him in the people of Israel." In the images his wealth is often expressed by sumptuous surroundings and serving maids. In the 17th and 18th centuries the number of servants and others in attendance swells to a veritable mob (example).

Food is another difference. Only in the Birth of Mary images does one find servants bringing the new mother something to eat: a bowl of soup in Dipre's painting (before 1531), a whole chicken in Nebbia's façade at Orvieto Cathedral (1350-90), and in the apse mosaic at Santa Maria in Trastevere (1291) a huge spread with a chicken, a jug of wine, flatbread, fruit slices, and a knife. In Pietro da Cortona's version1 a young serving girl proffers a basket of eggs, an appropriate symbol of fecundity for a woman heretofore barren.

Beginning in the Renaissance, some images place Anne farther into the background and put the baby into the arms of a youthful and vigorous attendant (example). Pietro Mara's 1635 version not only puts Anne remarkably far in the background but renders her alone in grisaille (Petricioli, 121). In some cases in the 17th and 18th centuries the attendant is a young wet nurse rather than the traditional midwife, as in this example from 1674.

Some 16th- and 17th-century images include St. Joachim as an incidental figure. In the 18th, with a greater emphasis on domesticity, he becomes more important. In this fresco, for example, he stands solidly behind mother and child, in the manner of 20th-century family portraits. And in this homely image, he sits beside the bed in the foreground, Anne holds the child, and instead of midwives we see servants warming the bedclothes.
THE PRESENTATION OF THE VIRGIN IN THE TEMPLE

The Golden Legend draws on narratives going back to the 2nd-century Protevangelium of James for this story. When Mary reaches the age of three her parents give her in service to the Temple. This seems an echo of the prophet Samuel's being given to the Temple by his mother Hannah, who like Anne bore the child after a long period of barrenness and whose grateful canticle in I Samuel 2:1-10 is reprised in Mary's "Magnificat," Luke 1:46-55. ("Anne" or "Anna" is simply a form for western languages of the Hebrew "Hannah.")

The Eastern churches have observed a feast day commemorating Mary's presentation from the sixth century until the present time. Orthodox images of the event may include a procession of virgins headed by Mary (Cartlidge and Elliott, 31, 37). In the West a feast of the Virgin's presentation was in the universal calendar only from 1476 until the reforms of the Council of Trent. Consequently, images of the event are less common in the West than images of other milestones in Mary's life (Hood, 128).

The images are easy enough to identify. The child is made to look somewhat older than three and is always ascending a flight of stairs to the Temple, sometimes with her arms crossed in a gesture of humility (example). Her parents stand at the foot of the stairs, and the High Priest stands at the top. The priest may be arrayed like Aaron in a breastplate and hornlike "holy crown," as in this example and the painting shown above. But sometimes he will be made to look more like a bishop and the Temple more like a Christian church with a tabernacle (example). This reflects the tradition that Mary is the antitype of the Ark of the Covenant. As Gregory Thaumaturgus put it in the 3rd century, "the holy Virgin is in truth an ark, wrought with gold both within and without."

In the literary sources it is important that the number of steps in the stairway be fifteen, the same as the number of the "Gradual Psalms." But the artists hardly ever follow this cue. Even in the large canvas shown above it seems just too difficult to squeeze in all fifteen. (Nicolas Dipres, however, solved the problem by arranging the seven lowest steps in a circle.)
LEARNING TO READ

Though not consistent with the claim that Mary entered Temple service at age 3, an iconography developed from at least the 14th century of sentimental domestic scenes in which St. Anne teaches Mary to read. In these Mary usually appears to be a child of anywhere from eight to fifteen years old. See my page on St. Anne.
THE MARRIAGE TO ST. JOSEPH

As the story continues, the Virgin Mary reaches marriageable age and the high priest seeks a sign to advise whether she should be given in marriage despite her parents' vow. An oracle instructs that every man of the house of David should bring a rod to the Temple; one of the rods will flower, and its owner is to be betrothed to the Virgin. Reluctantly, Joseph brings his rod. It flowers, a dove comes to rest on it, and so he is chosen. Giotto includes this episode in the Arena Chapel series, and in portraits of St. Joseph the rod is his attribute.

The literary sources pass quickly over what one of them calls "the usual ceremonies of betrothal," but in the art the marriage of the Virgin is a common subject. In this episode Joseph usually holds his flowering rod, with or without dove, and there may or may not be a ring. The high priest is sometimes dressed in the artist's idea of what such an official would have worn in Mary's time (example), and sometimes in the garb of a contemporary bishop (example). In most images the witnesses to the ceremony are numerous (example). The Gospel of Nicodemus (II, 4) names twelve, although I have not seen any with exactly that number.

After the betrothal but before the marriage came the question of Mary's pregnancy. In both the Protevangelium of James (chapter 16) and the Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew (chapter 12) the couple are summoned to explain themselves to the high priest, who is incredulous and orders them to drink "the water of drinking of the Lord," which supposedly would cause a sign to appear on their faces if they were lying. No such sign appears, so they are exonerated. This episode is illustrated in a 6th century ivory in the Louvre.

At right is a 3rd-century wall painting in the Catacomb of Priscilla, thought to be the earliest surviving image of the Annunciation.1 Mary sits on a solium, a high-backed chair with arm-rests that was reserved at the time for authority figures. This accords with the account of the Annunciation in the Prot­e­van­ge­lium of James, which has her sitting on a "throne" when the angel Gabriel arrives.2 The angel stands before her with his right arm raised in the gesture that signifies speech. He does not have wings, which in the third century had not yet become the way to distinguish an angel.

To this basic imagery the 5th and 6th centuries added another detail from the Protevangelium: that when the angel came to Mary she had been spinning purple thread for a new veil for the Temple. Typically, she holds a distaff or the end of the thread, which has accumulated in a basket at her feet (example). In the 13th century these details go out of favor in the West, although Tintoretto does use the thread and distaff in a striking revisionist interpretation (see below). In the East, the thread and basket continue in Annun­ciation images even today.
THE ANNUNCIATION AT THE SPRING

Before examining the tradition that developed from these beginnings, it is important to note a parallel paleo-Christian iconographic type that drew on the Protevangelium. In that text Mary is actually addressed two different times. The first time, she has taken a pitcher outside to fill it with water. Suddenly a disembodied voice tells her, "in thy womb thou hast prepared an habitation for the Lord." This preliminary scene is illustrated in a small but widespread number of 4th- through 6th-century images that are remarkably consistent in detail despite differences in medium, provenance, and style. In an early example from 4th-century Sicily, Mary kneels before a rock face with a spring near its summit. She fills her pitcher from the cascade of water flowing down from the spring. An angel, apparently the source of the voice, stands close by with his right arm raised in the gesture that signifies speech.

These details recur consistently in other examples, even to the type of pitcher: a footed, hipped vessel with a single handle. Another, better preserved example is this panel on a 5th-century diptych from Ravenna. Lidova (53-57) cites a number of very similar examples from northern Europe, as well as a 6th-century clay medallion from the Holy Land that suggests the image type may have "circulated as an independent visual motif used on pilgrims’ tokens." The dispersion of the tokens could explain why the various exemplars are so similar as to detail.

The motif's wide dispersion could perhaps be explained by the importance of water as a symbol of divine favor in so much early Christian art, particularly in the water miracles of Moses and St. Peter, where the water also flows from a rock face. The Ravenna diptych affirms the importance of the water by making it seem to flow down from the Annunciation panel into another one picturing the baptism of Jesus.
DEVELOPMENT IN THE MEDIEVAL WEST

From the 13th century onward most Annunciations in the Latin West dispense with the purple thread, and more and more will also omit the throne. These changes focus more clearly on the the letter of Luke 1:26-38, which is among the most frequently illustrated subjects in the West.

In their fullest and most common form western Annunciation images depict Mary on the right and the angel on the left. In two-dimensional works the Holy Spirit often arrives as a dove on rays of light. The "power of the Most High" is pictured in early versions as a hand reaching from Heaven, as in the mosaic at the top of this page. In later versions the "Most High" is the face or upper body of the Father (as here). The artists almost always ignore the metaphor in the word "overshadow." In scripture the word is often a metaphor for protection,3 but it has negative connotations in other contexts and certainly in visual art.

Almost all Annuncations are set indoors, though sometimes one or two trees will be incongruously added (example).

What Gabriel was announcing was a plan devised in Heaven for the redemption of mankind. Schiller (I, 10) suggests that literary and visual renditions of the Trinity's decision to undertake that plan trace back to Leo I's sermon on the Transfiguration (440-461), which has the Father saying that the Son "has condescended to take on the form of a servant in order to implement our mutual plan for the restitution of mankind."4

In literature perhaps the best known narrative of this decision is the third book of Paradise Lost, where the Father resolves that "man…shall find grace" despite his disobedience and the Son replies that he will take on humanity and sacrifice himself to obtain man's redemption, "me for him, life for life." The Father's reasoning in Milton is that Adam and Eve can justly be offered redemption because they were deceived into sin, unlike the fallen angels whose choice was entirely their own. He gives this same explanation in the Wakefield "Annunciation."

In art, the decision to redeem mankind through the Son's sacrifice was pictured as having been made by all three persons of the Trinity, envisioned as three separate men on a single throne, and manifested by the Father handing the Son a cross and/or sending Gabriel on his mission.5 In some the Son is pictured as a baby carrying the cross with him as he flies along the light rays to his mother-to-be (example). However, Molanus condemned this imagery because it suggested that Jesus did not take his body from Mary's.6 After Molanus's time the only baby in an Annunciation that I know of is in an archaizing sculpture from 1895.
THE GESTURES

In most early images Mary gestures to the angel with her palms held out (example). This appears to be a gesture of acceptance, consistent with her words in Luke 1:38, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it done to me according to thy word." In the 12th century this mosaic in the older Byz­an­tine style has St. Peter making the same gesture when the angel comes to free him from Herod's prison. Similarly, in Palermo's 12th-century Santa Maria dell'Ammiraglio church, St. Anne and St. Joachim make this gesture,7 apparently regarding the message that they should meet at the Golden Gate. However, in that same century in a sarcophagus relief in Verona St. Bacchus holds one palm out to express his refusal to worship the idols. This signification of the gesture is of course still current today.

After the 12th century the images respond to the new negative signification of the palm-out gesture either by modifying it (example) or by replacing it with a crossed-arms gesture bespeaking humble acceptance. We see the crossed arms, for example, in this Annunciation from 1445. They also appear, with the same significance, in this 15th-century painting of St. Benedict exorcising a grateful monk and in the allegorical figure of Humility in the Sant'Alvise Virtues.

In late- and post-medieval images Mary's hands may be clasped in prayer (example). Her mantle is blue in that picture and in many others.

As for Gabriel's gestures, in many early and some later images he extends his open hand toward Mary, a gesture that moderns might interpret as his saying "Hail" but that probably simply signified speech. In the 6th through 13th centuries, he may make the same blessing gesture we see in images of Christ from that era: index and middle fingers pointing up, fourth finger held down by the thumb. Examples include the 12th-century mosaic at the top of this page and (this one) from the 6th century. In later eras he usually points his index finger toward Mary or the sky, another way to signify speech. In the rare instances when Mary expresses her humility by crossing her arms over her chest, he may echo that gesture (example).
THE FIGURES

Very often Gabriel is posed at a respectful distance from Mary, separated by a real or pictured architectural detail such as a column (example). The two may even be placed in separate wings of a polyptych (example) or on opposite sides of a physical arch (example). This device is less common in small-scale images (example). In one striking exception from the 15th century, Mary has risen from her throne to approach the angel.

Another nearly universal tradition starting in the medieval period is keeping the dramatis personae to just the two figures of Mary and Gabriel. In the rare exceptions, secondary angels may attend (example), or there may be saints or donors contemplating the event (example). Émile Mâle also notes an added girl in a 12th-century stained glass in Angers. He ascribes her presence to the Gospel of the Nativity of Mary, where Mary is said to have had five Temple virgins with her in Nazareth at the time (Religous Art, 244).

The rays on which the dove arrives are almost always pointed at Mary's head, as in the first picture at right. In some post-medieval examples, there may be a flood of light instead of a dove (example).
MARY AT PRAYER

Inspired by a remark in The Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew that Mary "was always engaged in prayer and in searching the law" (chapter 6), western images come to picture her either studying scripture at a book-stand (example) or kneeling with a book at a prie-dieu (example). Sometimes the book is open to Isaiah 7:14, "Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and his name shall be called Emmanuel" (example).
SIGNS AND SYMBOLS

Following the tradition that the Annunciation occurred in Nazareth on March 25,8 the Golden Legend explains that "Nazareth means 'flower'; hence Bernard [of Clairvaux] says that the Flower willed to be born of a flower in 'Flower,' in the season of flowers." Accordingly, flowers appear in western Annunciations from the 13th century onward. Often a vase of flowers on the floor serves the compositional function earlier filled by the basket (example). Sometimes a bough of flowers replaces the sceptre in Gabriel's hand (example). Often the flowers are lilies, and by the 16th century the "season of flowers" idea yields to the notion that the lilies represent Mary's purity (Molanus, 274).

Other symbols one may see in the images include a sceptre for the angel, a distaff (but not after the 13th century in the west), and banderoles serving as speech bubbles with the Latin for "Hail Mary full of grace" and "I am the handmaid of the Lord" (example). The sceptre began as part of the Angel Gabriel's military uniform. In the West he became gradually less martial in appearance, although he has a sceptre and Roman military uniform as late as this altarpiece panel in the 16th century.

Starting in the 15th century, some scenes will include small quotidian details with symbolic significance, such as the hourglass in the first picture on the right and the great number of symbolic elements in Robert Campion's An­nun­ci­ation.

The Ark of the Covenant figures in Catholic doctrine regarding Mary, which interprets the angel's words, "Hail full of grace, the Lord is with thee" (Luke 1:28) as implying that she "is the daughter of Zion in person, the ark of the covenant." Thus a few images of the Annunciation picture the Ark or some other reference to the Temple.8
DISRUPTING THE ICONOGRAPHY

In the painting shown here Jacopo Tintoretto critiques and refocuses the traditional iconography of the Annunciation, aligning it more closely with the text and spirit of Luke 1:To begin with, Tintoretto's Mary is radically different. She is not seated on a throne as in the early images, nor does she kneel and study her Bible as in the medieval ones. Instead this painting firmly places her among the common people who have work to do. Her well-muscled arms fill her sleeves. She sits on a chair so small and low we cannot see it. Her work, a spool of purple thread for the Temple veil, lies on the table beside her. Her book is a tiny octavo. There is no blue mantle. This characterization corresponds to the theme of her prayer (Luke 1:53):
He has thrown down the mighty from their thrones,
and has lifted up the lowly.
The hungry he has filled with good things;
the rich he has sent away empty.
The irruption of the angel and the dove into this humble room is another upsetting of the iconographic tradition. Instead of separating Mary and Gabriel with an architectural element, the artist has the angel pass between two stone pillars, literally flying toward the Virgin. He too has the arms of someone familiar with physical labor. Similarly, the Holy Spirit does not float in on light rays but soars powerfully toward Mary, leading a host of angels and himself providing the light that illumines her face.

The girl's reaction to these powerful irruptions is another break with the tradition. Instead of the demure young lady who looks down and holds a hand to her breast, Tintoretto's Mary appears "greatly troubled" just as in Luke 1:29. Her arms and shoulders turn away, and her mouth is agape. It is this genuine fear that helps one appreciate the bravery of her reply, "Be it done unto me according to thy word" (1:38).

When Gabriel tells Mary that "the Holy Spirit will come upon you and the power of the Most High will overshadow you," Tintoretto accordingly has him point to the dove while the shadow of the broken pillar falls on Mary's lap, a rare case of an artist honoring the letter of that verse.

In the next episode in the chapter Zechariah breaks out in a canticle which in later times would be recited in churches and monasteries every morning, and which concludes:
In the tender compassion of our God
The dawn from on high shall break upon us
To shine on those who dwell in darkness and the shadow of death
And to guide our feet into the way of peace.
This is precisely what Tintoretto pictures on the left side of the painting, where a bright dawn rises over a dark and broken world.

One medieval poem has it that the Son of God
…cam also stille
To his modres bowr
As dew in Aprylle
That falleth on the flowr.10
Tintoretto will have none of that. His disruption of the iconography, his inclusion of the dawn from on high, and his sensitivity to the spirit of the text combine to present the Incarnation as the startling event that it is, an event that changes everything.

The "Visitation" is the Virgin Mary's visit to her cousin Elizabeth "in a city of Judah in the mountains" (Luke 1:39-56). It is the subject of the second "decade" of the Rosary prayer, so it has been especially familiar to Catholics since the 16th century. Images typically show the two women greeting each other upon Mary's arrival. Mary will always be identifiable by her blue mantle. More often than not she is veiled. Elizabeth is almost always veiled. The greeting is usually pictured as an embrace, as above. In one case I have seen there is a kiss. Sometimes Elizabeth touches Mary's belly or breast. A sculpture in the Metropolitan Museum gives each a belly of gemstone.
THE SETTING

The setting varies but is almost never inside Elizabeth's house (see one very late exception). It may be at the entrance, following the Prot­evan­ge­lium's statement that Elizabeth "ran to the door" (¶12) when Mary knocked. The house is often made to look somewhat like a church or temple, as in the first and second pictures at right. In the picture above, the flying buttresses and ribbed vaulting that characterize Gothic churches of the day have been added to an otherwise normal home.

Alternatively, to represent the "city of Judah in the mountains" the greeting may be set outside the city gates (example), sometimes as far outside as a couple of football fields. This gave Renaissance artists a chance to indulge in a bit of landscape painting (example).
THE PARTICIPANTS

Sometimes Mary and Elizabeth are the only persons in the composition, or in the case of city-gates settings there may be just one distant figure entering or leaving at the gate. But many Visitations add other characters. Quite a few in the late Middle Ages are like the picture above, where Mary arrives in the company of other young women. In the apocryphal gospels Mary leaves the Temple after Joseph is chosen as her spouse-to-be. The priests assign some Temple virgins to accompany her to the home where she will be awaiting Joseph.1 It is likely that these are the companions in the medieval Visitations.

In a few cases Mary is accompanied by what appears to be a female servant carrying a sack, as in the third picture at right. In the fourth picture the sack becomes a satchel.

In that fourth picture we also see a young girl standing at the city gate, a figure with precedents going back to early Christian times. In the first picture at right, a mosaic of the 6th-century, a boy pulls back a curtain with a gesture of contemplation. In the second picture, from the 12th century, he looks out from a window. And in the third it is a young woman who looks out, drawing back a curtain as in the first picture.

And of course we sometimes see Elizabeth's husband Zechariah, as above and in this example.
THE MONTHS

In Luke the angel tells Mary that Elizabeth is six months pregnant, and Mary stays with her for three months. Adding in the time for travel to Judah, we might calculate that Mary was there for the birth of John the Baptist, and indeed the Golden Legend tells us that she stayed in the city "for three months until John was born, and lifted him from the earth with her own hands" (Ryan I, 200).2 This is pictured in Salimbeni's cycle on the life of John the Baptist, as is Mary's departure.

The event pictured above is called the Hypapante by the Eastern churches. In the West it is referred to sometimes as the Purification of the Blessed Virgin and sometimes as the Presentation of Jesus in the Temple.

The western names refer to the two Jewish rituals that Mary and Joseph observe in Luke's gospel. The first is the ritual of a woman's "purification" after childbirth, which is detailed in Leviticus 12:2-8. For forty days after the birth, the mother is considered blood-impure. On the fortieth day she brings to the Temple a lamb and a dove, or two doves if she cannot afford a lamb. The priest offers these in the Temple and thus she is "purified." The other ritual is set forth in Exodus 13:2, 12-13. A firstborn son is to be dedicated to God and then "ransomed" with some unspecified offering. Luke 2:22 conflates these two rituals: "And after the days of her purification, according to the law of Moses, were accomplished, they carried him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord."

In the images of this conflated event, Mary and Joseph bring to the Temple both the two doves for Mary's purification and their son for the dedication and ransoming. In many late medieval images the child has been placed on an altar, as above and in this example. This keeps the viewer in mind that the child is indeed Jesus, the sacrifical "lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world" (John 1:29) through his redemptive sacrifice on the Cross. In a sermon on the Presentation, Bernard of Clairvaux urges Mary, "Offer your son, sacred Virgin, and present to the Lord the blessed fruit of your womb. Offer the sacred victim (hostia), pleasing to God, that all of us may be reconciled to him. He is sure to accept this new oblation, this precious victim." And in the York play of the Presentation, when Mary laments having no lamb to offer, Joseph says, "Our baby Jesus…is our lamb, Mary.… He is the lamb of God, I say, who all our sins shall take away."1 In the same spirit Salviati's Presentation of Jesus in the Temple emphasizes the "ransoming" of the child by putting him in the arms of the High Priest and having the doves offered for his return. The artist ties this ransoming to the adult Christ's sacrificial death for the redemption of mankind by placing an angel above the child holding a rod and the crown of thorns.
SIMEON AND ANNA

Presentation images almost always include Simeon, a man who according to Luke's gospel had been "waiting for the consolation of Israel" and had been told by the Holy Spirit "that he should not see death, before he had seen the Christ of the Lord" (Luke 2:25-26). Although Luke says only that he was "a man," the images consistently follow apocryphal accounts that represent him as an aged priest.2

In medieval mystery plays Simeon bespeaks the longings of the just for God's redemption.3 Some images make this longing reciprocal through the gestures of Simeon and the baby. In this mosaic in Sicily, the two reach their arms toward each other across a wide distance punctuated by a small image of a ciborium. The Ugljan Triptych in Zadar also puts the two figures on either side of a ciborium, their arms reaching toward each other.4 In contrast, however some later works such as the picture above may prefer a more naturalistic effect with the baby reaching back to the mother and away from the scary stranger.

Until the 14th century Simeon always received the child with hands covered by his mantle (example) or by a separate cloth (example). This tradition arose from the Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew (3rd or 4th century), which said that when Simeon saw the child he "took him up into his cloak and kissed his feet." It continued in the West even into the 16th century (example). But it was not mentioned in the Golden Legend, so we start to see uncovered hands in the West in the 14th century, as in the picture above. In the 15th and especially the 16th, the child himself may be half- or fully naked.

An aged prophetess named Anna is also present in Luke's account and is in many Presentation images. The mystery plays make her a representative of mankind's longings as well, but in the images she usually just stands to the side.
THE FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY

Medieval commentators saw the Presentation event as the fulfilment of prophecies in scripture, and a lengthy passage in the Chester Purification play has Simeon and Anna studying the scriptures together.5 The reliefs at Orvieto Cathedral have Simeon reading a book before the Presentation occurs, and a book is on the altar in a 13th-century Presentation image in Rome.
CANDLEMAS / CANDELARIA

Simeon calls the child "a light to the revelation of the Gentiles" and tells Mary, "thy own soul a sword shall pierce." These remarks have a lasting impact on liturgy and iconography in the West. The comment about the sword leads to a subset of the Sorrowful Mother type in which Mary's breast is pierced by a sword (example). The comment about light to the Gentiles led to the celebration of the feast of Candlemas. On February 2, 40 days after Christmas, the faithful bring candles to the church to be blessed and lighted. Medieval and later images of the Purification / Presentation normally include candles to refer to the feast and to the belief that Christ is indeed the light to the Gentiles (Catholic Encyclopedia, s.v. "Candlemas").

In Latin countries, La Candelaria is the name both for Candlemas and for a santo of the Virgin and Child that is processed on that day. The santo typically wears a crown and has the Christ Child in her arms and a candle or other symbolic object in one hand. Sometimes the child also wears a crown.
THE SETTING AND THE DRAMATIS PERSONAE

Luke says Simeon greeted the child after going "into the Temple." Western medieval images follow suit by putting the figures within a room-like area (example). But earlier works show the action as if outdoors (example).

The number of persons in Presentation images can be as few as just Mary, the baby and Simeon (and maybe Joseph and Anna), or it can include a whole throng of bystanders, which in later medieval works may include a young woman with uncovered hair carrying the basket of doves (example). The latter could possibly be one of the virgins the priests assigned as Mary's companions in the apocryphal gospels.6

Sometimes people confuse the Presentation in the Temple with the Circumcision, which occurred on the 8th day of the child's life. The Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew (¶15) says, "when the infant had received parhithomus, that is, circumcision, they offered for him a pair of turtle-doves." And this fresco in Santo Spirito, Rome, has a mitred priest attending to the naked Christ Child as if it were a Circumcision image, yet it also includes attendants with candles and the bareheaded young woman with the basket of doves.

The 4th through the 13th centuries saw a number of influential writings on the passing of the Virgin Mary. Details varied, but the core story was the same. The Apostles gather around Mary's bed and Christ comes to take her soul. They then perform a funeral service and carry the body to a cemetery. There her body and soul are reunited and she is taken into heaven as a living, embodied person.1

The writers never refer to Mary as dying; rather, she "fell asleep." The Latinate phrase "Dormition of the Virgin" refers to images of this falling asleep, which art historians and museum curators sometimes tendentiously label "The Death of the Virgin."

Images of the Dormition go back to at least the 9th century. In the first picture at right, we see their basic pattern: Mary's body reclines on a bier attended by the Apostles while her soul is taken in hand by Christ. The soul is signified by a child-like figure that is either clothed or swaddled. Often one or more of the Apostles will be pictured with objects used in funeral rites, such as a book, a censer, or candles.

In early versions such as the one at right, Christ hands the soul up to an angel, who in this case is represented on the left as approaching with covered hands and on the right as ascending with Mary's soul. The assignment of this duty to an angel follows John Damascene (Toal, III, 431-32) and Gregory of Tours' Glory of the Martyrs (22), who identifies the angel as Michael. Some images follow this example, but most are like the second picture at right, where Christ himself carries his mother's soul aloft.

THE APOSTLES AT MARY'S BEDSIDE

In many images Christ has already taken the soul and the Apostles gather around the recumbent Virgin to celebrate the Office of the Dead – with candles, books, an aspergillum, a censer, and the like. In the first half of the 8th century St. Germanus of Canstantinople wrote that the privilege of offering "the accustomed prayer" over the body had been accorded to St. Peter, so in these images he is usually the one reading from the breviary.2 In the third picture at right he wears liturgical vestments, but usually all the apostles are pictured conventionally: barefoot, with flowing mantles over long tunics.

In other images St. John lifts the Mary's body up to place it on the bier while the other Apostles look on (example).

The number of Apostles in these images varies. Often there will be eleven (example). This is because The Passing of Mary and one version recounted by the Golden Legend say St. Thomas did not arrive until later. Elsewhere one may count twelve apostles, but one of them may be the supernumerary Paul (example). A smaller piece may include just a few (example).

Besides the Apostles, some images will show a large number of people in attendance (example), following the tradition expressed in St. Andrew of Crete and John of Damascus. Pseudo-Joseph of Arimathea adds three of Mary's maiden companions, but it is rare for any women at all to be pictured.3

THE PALM BRANCH

In John of Thessalonica's Dormition account, Mary is told of her imminent transit to Heaven by "the great angel," who gives her a palm branch that "he who planted Paradise" had entrusted to him. He tells her to give it to the apostles to carry in the funeral procession, explaining that "by it many shall be healed." In the third picture at right St. John holds the palm branch. In this one Peter holds it. In Ghirlandaio's fresco one of the Apostles holds a young palm tree in his hand. I have seen a few other examples, but usually the artists ignore it.4

THE ASSAULT OF THE JEWS

In most accounts a Jewish crowd assaults the bier while the Apostles are taking it to the cemetery in Gethsemane. One of them, identified in some sources as the Chief Priest, lays his hands on the bier in an attempt to cast it to the ground. His hands then wither or fall off, depending on the source (example). Astonished by this miracle the man repents and converts to Christianity, whereupon he gets his hands back.5 Some Orthodox images have the hands cut off by an angel (See this example and others cited by Professor Boguslawsky ["The Assumption"], who identifies the angel as St. Michael.)

COMBINED IMAGES

Narrative images of the Dormition are sometimes part of compositions that integrate it with the Assumption (example) or the Coronation of Mary (example) or both (example).

Neither scripture nor Catholic dogma says anything about Mary as a queen, but this trope goes back at least to the 7th century, when John of Damascus wrote of angel choirs "going up with her as she ascended to heaven, until they stood with the Queen by the heavenly throne." In the 8th century Andrew of Crete writes of the angels welcoming "the Queen of our race," and another work in the 9th says Christ "gladly placed her on a throne at his side." Mary's queenship was also affirmed in an antiphon in the Tridentine Office of Lauds for Assumption Day: "Today the Virgin Mary ascends to Heaven; rejoice, for she reigns with Christ forever."1

The earliest visual reference to this trope that I have seen is a Catalan apse fresco of the first half of the 12th-century. A band beneath the large image of Christ in glory contains standing portraits of Mary and the apostles, each with an attribute. Mary's attribute is a crown, which she holds in her left hand.

We see a full development of the trope in a tympanum at Senlis from about 1170, where Christ and Mary share a throne, both of them wearing crowns. This composition is repeated almost exactly in a tympanum at Chartres (1194-1260) and less exactly in the apse mosaic at Santa Maria in Trastevere.

These works would more properly be called "Enthronements" rather than "Coronations," because in them Mary already has her crown. Indeed, there is still no mention of a coronation in the Golden Legend's extensive account of Mary's reception into Heaven in 1260. But true Coronation images begin to show up in the 13th century and eventually become the standard. One the early example is the tympanum of the Portal of the Virgin (1210s-1220s) at Notre Dame de Paris, in which an angel reaches down from above the Virgin to place the crown on her head. The angel also does the crowning in an ivory from about 50 years later, but by the end of the century the typical Coronation shows Christ himself placing the crown on Mary's head as the two sit enthroned and flanked by angels. This is the pattern in the mosaic at the top of this page and in most of the ensuing centuries.

A less common pattern has Mary crowned by the Trinity. In some images she is seated between the Son and the Father, who together place the crown on her head while the Holy Spirit hovers just above (example). One example, a Mexican nun's badge, combines the Coronation by the Trinity with the iconography of the Immaculate Conception. A Spanish relief from 1200 appears to include an antecedent of this type. In an unusual Spanish example from the 18th century, the Trinity is pictured as three identical men, one of whom has just placed the crown on Mary's head. In other variants the Father alone crowns Mary, who kneels before him with her arms crossed over her breast, as in the second picture at right. In this example the Father expresses a paternal blessing by standing behind Christ and Mary with his hands on their shoulders.

THE HAND GESTURES

In the earlier examples cited on this page it is common for Mary to express humility by holding her hands forward, palms out. This usage fades away in the 15th century, replaced by the "praying hands" gesture or the crossing of the arms over her breast, which are both about equal in frequency.

THE VIRGIN MARY AS THRONE

In its day, the mosaic pictured above was revolutionary. Before the 5th century portraits of Christ normally pictured him as an adult, flanked by saints and holding a book or scroll (example). But in the 5th century and then much more frequently in the 6th, an image type develops in which he is a child held by his mother on her knee or, much more often, her lap. The mother is herself pictured sitting on a throne with a red velvet cushion, and the child holds a scroll or book.

Why did this happen? Visualizing the Virgin Mary on a throne was not unprecedented. That is how she was often portrayed in the earliest images of the Adoration of the Magi (example), and in the literature as early as the 3rd century she was referred to as the "true cherubic throne" of Christ.1 But the major impetus for re-imagining the portrayal of Christ as a child on her lap came after the Council of Ephesus in 431, which settled a bitter dispute over whether it was proper to refer to her as Theotokos – meaning literally, "God-bearer" but effectively Mother of God. Indeed it was proper, the Council decreed: because Christ's divine and human natures are inseparable, the child Mary bore was both God and man.2 As a consequence of this proclamation, the sponsors of orthodox Christian art developed new forms such as the mosaic we see above.

In the earliest examples, according to Shepherd (93), the child continued to be flanked by saints and Mary was dressed as "a woman of the ordinary classes in late antiquity." But by the 6th century she is pictured in a mantle of imperial purple pulled up to form a veil over a white cap, as we see in the mosaic above and in this one. Her shoes in these images are red, a style favored by the Emperor and other persons of high status in the Byzantine court.

In these 6th-century images the saints have been displaced by angels. Like the child, these are dressed in the costume of the day: an inner tunic, an outer tunic, and a pallium draped over the left shoulder. The child usually holds a scroll in his left hand and lifts his right in what Shepherd calls "the gesture of delivering the Law" (ibid.).
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE WEST

In the West this iconographic type morphs into a variety of forms.
The Throne of Wisdom

One type popular in the West in the 12th century was the "Throne of Wisdom" sculpture, as in the first picture at right. Mary sits on a throne and holds the Christ Child on her lap, her right hand on his breast or torso. In earlier versions the throne has no back. In turn, the child holds a book on his lap. In medieval thought Christ is himself Wisdom, the character who speaks and is praised in the Bible's "wisdom books" (Proverbs, Wisdom, and Sirach). Filippo Lippi makes this point in his Madonna and Child Enthroned with Two Angels, a painting based on the Throne of Wisdom type. In that painting one angel holds a scroll with a phrase spoken by Wisdom in the Book of Sirach, "Come over to me, all ye that desire me, and be filled with my fruits" (24:26). For the 14th-century Mirror of Human Salvation "the throne of Solomon prefigures the Most Blessed Virgin Mary in whom resides Jesus Christ, true wisdom" (Labriola, 35).

The Throne of Wisdom is a sculptural tradition, but one sees its influence on two-dimensional works such as this mosaic.
The Madonna and Child

A sculpture discovered in the early 20th century in the diocesan archives at Seu d'Urgell, Catalonia, proved to be a mid-12th century Throne of Wisdom and was restored with the child facing forward and centered on Mary's lap. But when discovered the child had been displaced from the lap to his mother's left knee.3 It is not known when this happened, but it does testify to a determined re-imagining of the Throne of Wisdom after the 12th century. Mary ceases to be a throne, the child no longer sits on her lap, and as time goes by he becomes more and more evidently a human boy. An example of this transition is a late Throne of Wisdom in the Cloisters. The many variations on this new iconography can be grouped under the name "Madonna and Child."

In these images the Virgin Mary will usually have either a blue mantle over a red robe or a red mantle over a blue robe. There may be a star on her shoulder (example), especially in images earlier than the 14th century. Sometimes she may be pictured barefoot and in simple clothes (example) or seated on the floor or the bare ground, in a subtype known as the Madonna of Humility (example). This type developed in the mid-14th century, but its popularity grew exponentially after the 1370s with the diffusion of Bridget of Sweden's Nativity vision, in which Mary adored the child lying on the ground and then "sitting on the earth, she put her Son in her lap." One iconographic type popular in Mexico has her wearing jewelry (example). In the case of sculptures she is usually represented standing (example). Another Mexican type, Our Lady of Light, has her holding the child on her left arm as usual while with her right she pulls a young man up out of the mouth of a monster (Zarur and Lowell, figures 40-42).

When the child is not turned toward the viewer, he may look to his mother and touch her chin or cheek (example), a gesture adopted from the Byzantine "Glykophilousa" icon type. Less often, he will be looking off to the side (example). In one remarkable case in Vienna he turns from the viewer to snuggle up to his mother. In many Renaissance and late medieval works he holds some symbolic object in his hand. It may be an orb referring to his lordship over the earth (example), or it may be an orb-shaped fruit such as a pomegranate, whose red juice symbolizes the blood of the Crucifixion and the wine of the Eucharist (example). In this statue in Spain the fruit is an apple. In this painting it is a pear. In the Wakefield Second Shepherds' Play, the third shepherd offers the child a ball (line 734, Cawley, 62). In this less subtly symbolic image an angel hands the child a cross. Guido Reni's St. Joseph with the Christ Child in his Arms applies this kind of symbolism to Joseph: The Christ Child looks up at him and tugs his beard with the right hand while the left holds a European Columbine, whose seven petals correspond to the "seven sorrows" of the Virgin Mary.5 Bronzino's "Virgin and Child with Saint Elizabeth and Saint John the Baptist" includes a great many symbolic references to the Passion within an otherwise tender portrait of the baby kissing his mother.

Or it may be a bird or a cluster of grapes that has captured the child's interest. These objects had been common in classical images of children (example).4 Rediscovery and reinterpretation of those images may have influenced Renaissance and late-medieval iconography. The bird may be a goldfinch or a swallow. The goldfinch (see the third picture at right) was said to nest in the kind of plants from which the soldiers fashioned the Crown of Thorns. The swallow (example) was supposed to "resurrect" itself from the ground in the spring.6

The grapes in classical images of children become in Christian iconography a reference to the wine of the Eucharist and thus to the blood shed on the Cross (example). In some images the grapes are offered to the child by Anne or Joseph (example). In others he holds them himself, and in a few remarkable cases even squeezes their juice into a chalice. In Marten de Vos's St. Luke Painting the Virgin's Portrait, the child has taken a cluster of grapes from his mother and appears to be holding it out to St. Luke, but Luke's canvas has him offering it to the viewer.7 In this case the grapes, linked symbolically with the Eucharist and Christ's giving of his blood, become an invitation to share in his sacrifice.

The way the child himself is pictured changes over time. In Romanesque works he wears formal garments, holds a scroll or book in his left hand, and blesses the viewer with his right (example). In the later 13th century this formalism begins to loosen up. The clothing becomes age-appropriate, and the scroll or book may be omitted (example). Instead of blessing the viewer the child will use his right hand as babies naturally do – reaching out for a pretty object (example) or for his mother's hair or neck (example). In the 15th, he is typically naked (example) and the images may portray him with fully developed genitalia (example). (See Steinberg, Sexuality of Christ in Renaissance Art). Starting in the mid-16th, the genitalia will be hidden by a bit of clothing (example), or Mary's hand (example), or some such device.

This emphasis on the humanity of the child leads to a vogue in the 15th and 16th centuries for the Madonna Lactans. This type, seen in the west as early as the 12th century (example) and in Egypt in the 5th or 6th (Brown, 142-44), pictures the child suckling at Mary's breast (example). This kind of image was specifically approved by Molanus (93) in 1570, but it became rather rare in the succeeding centuries. Some continuing appeal is evidenced by this contemporary display in a shop window in Bethlehem.

Some paintings in the West derived from the Byzantine Hodegetria type, in which Mary engages the viewer's eyes while pointing to the child (example). A close Western approximation of the Hodegetria is the image of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, which arose in the 15th century and is common even today in Catholic churches and homes. In this icon (the second picture at right) the child's future is represented by angels who carry the instruments of his passion and death.

Another western type adapted the Byzantine Parthenos Eleousa ("Merciful Virgin"), in which Mary hugs the child tightly and he presses his cheek against hers and places his hand on her mantle or chest:

In the ca. 1300 stained glass image on the right (see the description page), the artist has adapted the Byzantine "Parthenos Eleousa" tradition to that of the Madonna Enthroned. The image on the left is a 15th-century copy of the "Virgin of Vladimir" icon, painted in Constantinople and brought to Kyiv in 1130.8
Medieval examples of the influence of the "Parthenos Eleousa" in the West include Lorenzetti's Madonna and Child with St. Mary Magdalene and St. Dorothy (1325) and the Salimbenis' Madonna and Child with Saints Sebastian and John the Baptist (1416), which is like the stained glass shown above in applying it to a Virgin Enthroned image. The type was also popular in the Renaissance. Thereafter interest declined somewhat in the West, but we do have an example that Sassoferrato painted in the 17th century and another by Pompeo Battoni in 18th.

Another Byzantine type influential in the west was the Pelagonitissa or "Virgin with the Playing Child" – "With an abrupt movement, the Child throws his head back, grabbing onto Mary" (Tradigo, 180). In western treatments the child will reach for his mother's face, neck, or veil.

Mary as Priest

I have encountered two images, centuries apart, that dress the Virgin Mary as a priest. The first is an ivory of the Ascension produced some time in the 8th to 10th century in Egypt. In it Mary's garments reference the Church that Christ is leaving for mankind as he returns to the Father. In the other image, The Priesthood of the Virgin, from France in the 15th century, she stands at an altar with Gospel book in hand while the donor says, "Vestment worthy of the sovereign priest." That is, in the Incarnation Mary became the "vestment" of Christ.
With the Apostles

In Acts 1:12-14 the Apostles (called "Men of Jerusalem") return from witnessing the Ascension and join Mary, some other women, and Jesus' brothers in the upper room. Scripture thus excludes Mary from the group that witnessed the Ascension, and it does not say she was present at the Descent of the Holy Ghost. Nevertheless, she is pictured with the Apostles in images of the Ascension as early as the 6th century, in images of the Descent of the Holy Ghost from the 12th century onward, and at least once in a "Doubting Thomas" painting.9 In quite a few 12th-century works she and the Twelve will appear arranged in a band, not necessarily with her in the exact center. This is the case in some Catalan apse frescoes, where like the others she will hold an attribute – in one case a crown, in others a pitcher or bowl probably referencing the belief that the angel of the Annunciation first approached her when she was drawing water at a spring.10 In Torcello, Italy, the band is placed along the top of the rood screen; this time Mary is centered and holds the Christ Child. In the crossing cupola in St. Marks, Venice, the band circles around an image of Christ ascending into Heaven and Mary's figure is flanked by angels. In all these examples she holds one or both hands palm-out to the viewer. The gesture with two palms could be an allusion to Mary's gesture of acceptance in 12th-century and earlier Annunciations (see this note on our Annunciation page).
IMAGES FOR SPECIFIC TITLES
Mary is known under countless titles. Some refer to points of doctrine or scripture, such as the Immaculate Conception, the Mater Dolorosa, or the Candelaria. Others are associated with specific countries or locales, such as Mexico's Our Lady of Guadalupe or Panama's Santa María de la Antigua or the Salus Populi Romani in Rome.